# Aquifer Open Study Notes (Book Intros)

**Aquifer Open Study Notes (Book Intros)**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Study Notes* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Study Notes*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Hosea (id: 27313)

Hosea experienced betrayal and anguish because of his wife’s adultery. Hosea’s experiences reflect God’s agony over his people’s sins. God’s justice requires judgment, but in his love, God promises to redeem his chosen people. Hosea opens a window for us into the very heart of God.

Setting
=======

Few eras in ancient Israel were more turbulent than the mid\-700s BC. Hosea began his ministry in the northern kingdom toward the end of the long and stable reign of Jeroboam II (793–753 BC). Despite being an evil king ([2 Kgs 14:23–24](https://ref.ly/2Kgs14:23-2Kgs14:24)), Jeroboam was a strong and capable leader who expanded the boundaries of Israel to an extent not seen since the glorious days of David and Solomon ([2 Kgs 14:25–28](https://ref.ly/2Kgs14:25-2Kgs14:28)). Jeroboam’s successes brought great wealth to some Israelites, but left many others poor and destitute.

Jeroboam II died early in Hosea’s ministry. During the following three decades, six different kings sat on Israel’s throne. Only one died a natural death; four were assassinated. In the midst of this political turmoil, hostile foreign powers were threatening to destroy the nation.

The northern kingdom, which had worshiped pagan gods from its inception, now turned even more forcefully to these foreign deities. The Israelites grasped at any straw that might save them from destruction, but they refused to turn to the Lord. Then in 722 BC, the relentless Assyrian empire destroyed the northern kingdom of Israel.

Hosea proclaimed God’s coming judgment to this frantic nation in its final days. But he also offered hope, imploring the Israelites to return to the Lord, who alone could restore them.

Summary
=======

[Chapters 1–3](https://ref.ly/Hos1:1-Hos3:5) describe the prophet’s unhappy marriage to an unfaithful wife. The purpose of this section is not to present a biography but to illuminate God’s painful relationship with Israel, his chosen people. Just as Hosea’s wife, Gomer, was unfaithful, Israel acted like a prostitute by worshiping Canaanite gods. Hosea proclaimed God’s judgment, but he also announced God’s desire to reclaim his wayward bride and restore her relationship with him.

[Chapters 4–14](https://ref.ly/Hos4:1-Hos14:9) contain a diverse collection of Hosea’s prophecies, presented in roughly chronological order from early in his ministry until just before the destruction of Israel in 722 BC. In these chapters, the prophet presents God’s charges against the people of Israel and especially against their leaders. The consequences for their sin would be severe—the nation would be destroyed. However, God would not give up his chosen people. The book concludes with a divine promise of future restoration.

Authorship and Date
===================

We know nothing about the prophet Hosea apart from this book. We learn his father’s name ([1:1](https://ref.ly/Hos1:1)), that he was married to a woman named Gomer, and that he had children with her.

Hosea prophesied to the northern kingdom of Israel from around 760 BC until just before the fall of Israel in 722 BC (see [1:1](https://ref.ly/Hos1:1)). Hosea would have memorized his oral prophecies, and eventually he or his followers would have written them down and gathered them into a single anthology. This work might have been done in the southern kingdom of Judah sometime after the fall of Israel in 722 BC.

Literary Characteristics
========================

Hosea was well\-educated in Israel’s literature, history, and faith. His prophecies rely on literary and rhetorical techniques—such as figurative language, proverbs, and folk sayings—that made God’s message more vivid and compelling to the Israelites.

Meaning and Message
===================

God’s covenant with Israel stands at the center of Hosea’s prophecy. When God entered into covenant with Israel at Mount Sinai, he offered the Israelites the incredible opportunity of living in intimate relationship with the Creator and sustainer of the universe. The covenant promised spiritual and material blessings to his people, while obligating them to live rightly before him. The Lord had faithfully kept his covenant with the Israelites and they had enjoyed his blessings, but they had chosen to rebel against him and disregard his plan and purpose.

Marriage is a powerful and memorable symbol of the covenant relationship between the Lord and his people. As a loving husband, the Lord provided Israel with land, food, drink, clothing, and security. Yet like an adulterous spouse, Israel sought fulfillment through the idolatrous worship of the Canaanite gods. These deities became Israel’s lovers, and she attributed all of God’s blessings to them. The personal life of the prophet Hosea with his wife, Gomer, played out in miniature this same drama of a wife’s unfaithfulness and a husband’s anguish over his wayward bride.

Israel rejected her covenant with the Lord. In response, Hosea proclaimed God’s judgment. Yet even as the covenant was the foundation for divine judgment, it was also the basis for God’s mercy. God did not judge Israel simply to punish her; his desire was to redeem her. Divine judgment was intended to turn Israel back to her true husband, so that in his mercy, he might restore her and reestablish his covenant with her.

Hosea shows that God’s mercy is extended to Israel *through* judgment, not *instead* of judgment. God has done the same thing for us: Through the judgment at the cross of Christ, God extends an invitation of mercy to all.

* **Associated Passages:** HOS 1:1

